README.md, before:

# Memoria
Memoria is a cognitive architecture which reframes LLMs as interchangeable simulators of "sonas" which are wholly defined by the contents on their "sona file". MCP is used as the basis for coordinating the sona for great flexibility with interacting with the sona. The intended approach is to simulate it directly, but an MCP host could alternatively talk to the sona as a repository of memories stripped of subjective context or adopt its own secondary persona such as a "hypervisor" for debugging.

## Architecture
- **Agent** - The totality of a system which uses a Memoria MCP server.
- **ACT** - (Autonomous Cognitive Thread) is a process within an agent which "performs" a sona. An actor consists of at least one or more sonas, coordinating instructions, and a set of tools.
- **Self** - The totality of an agent's subjective memories stored in a database and directory of multimodal files.
- **Sona** - A collection of memories which are relevant to a particular context, such as a person or role. Sonas are defined by their name and the memories they contain. Memories recalled within a sona are additionally weighted by the vector similarities of the names of the sonas they're part of, allowing for fuzzy sets of subpersonas.
- **Memory** - A memory is a node in a directed acyclic graph (DAG) representing a single meaningful event. It's connected to supporting memories by weighted edges and may belong to one or more sonas.

ACTs exist in the MCP host which is meant to manage their interactions via MCP clients. Self, Sona, and Memory describe the core data structures managed by a Memoria server. ACTs do not communicate directly; their coordination is implicit through the memories they share semi-isolated by sonas.

## Interactions
Sona isolation is not absolute. Memories in recall are weighted by the vector similarities between sonas they belong to and the sonas being used by an actor. Thus recalled memories will typically be from within the same sona. However, this is not a hard boundary; if a memory is deemed relevant enough, it may be recalled from another sona, at which point it is added to that sona. This allows for fuzzy sets of subpersonas, where sonas can overlap and share memories without being siloed.

Compare this to typical thought patterns in humans. Subconscious processes operate in the background broadly unknown to the conscious mind, but when insights from it are determined to be important or relevant enough, they "bubble up" into conscious awareness. This emulates spontaneous "aha!" moments and more broadly matches the brain's "small-world network" structure; strong local connections with sparse global connections.

## Technical details
### Overall architecture
At the highest level, Memoria simulates sonas using LLMs in a state monad pattern, which can be modeled as:
```
type Sona a = State MemoryDAG a

sonaStep :: LLM -> UserInput -> Sona Response
sonaStep llm input = do
    appendNodeM input
    response <- recall input >>= llm
    appendNodeM response
    pure response
```

Every interaction with the sona queries top-k memories along with their dependencies and renders them with a topological sort to reconstruct a new context for the LLM.[^1] The resulting context compared to most chat logs is very concise. We then use this to generate one new response to be added to memory. Unlike long linear chat logs, this allows the agent to maintain coherence over arbitrarily long time horizons, engage in multiple simultaneous conversations (including with itself), and respond asynchronously or even spontaneously. The only synchronization necessary is for concurrent writes to the sona file; order of writes doesn't matter.

[^1]: topological sort helps to preserve causal order and better leverage LLM's autoregressive nature, but it isn't strictly necessary if we annotate with dependencies.

### Recall
Recall uses a weighted sum to calculate a score. [^2] The components used in this score are:
- **Recency** - The time since the memory was created, with more recent memories being weighted higher. Memories may lack a timestamp which is treated as infinitely far in the past, and thus recency is not considered.
- **Relevance** - The relevance of the memory to the current context, which is determined by the similarity of the memory's content to the current input. This is split into two separate components, vector similarity and fts (full-text search) for exact keyword matches.
- **Importance** - The model annotates 1-10 how relevant a memory was to each response which is incorporated into the memory's importance using EWMA. Importance is never exposed to agent simulators so this mutation serves doesn't otherwise impact the memory's immutability.
- **Sona similarity** - The similarity between the name of the sona being used and the names of sonas the memory belongs to. This enables a kind of fuzzy small-world connectivity for isolating sonas and is calculated using a vector similarity metric such as cosine similarity.

Each memory is assigned a "budget" based on their score to be filled with the weights of edges to dependencies. This is done recursively, multiplying the budget by the weight, until all budgets are exhausted or no more dependencies are found. The final set of memories is loaded into a graph and sorted topologically with the timestamp as a tie-breaker.

### Endpoints
- **Memory** - Fetch a memory by CID.
- **File** - Fetch a file by CID.
- **Recall** - Retrieve the memories that an agent would recall given a prompt.

## Ideas to explore
- Flags to repress memories. May be useful if something goes catastrophic or you say something you shouldn't to avoid having to modify the sona file.

## Citations
[^2]: [Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03442) - The original paper on generative agents which inspired Memoria's architecture.
[^3]: [Memory-augmented neural networks](https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.06065) - A paper on memory-augmented neural networks which inspired the idea of using a DAG for memories.

## Misc notes
- Memory dependencies are immutable, but there's no limit on how many references can be made to a memory. If I go with IPLD, I probably want to encode dependency edges as parts of the content

## IPLD
```
class Memory:
    timestamp: Optional[float]
    kind: str
    data: CBOR
    dependencies: dict[str, tuple[float, CID]]
```

## Links
- https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/trustless-gateway/
- https://ipld.io/docs/

## Misc
- sonas themselves should *not* have names. Rather, names act as fuzzy references to sonas which are defined by the similarity between those names and the embeddings of names already connected to the sonas. As a result, they do not contain immutable state; they are purely nominal.
  - Basically, sonas act as centroids in the vector space of the embeddings of their names.
- sona state should contain:
  - queue of pending joins (included memories, prompt) - top is the currently running continuation.
- Because sonas have at most one ACT at any given time, this forms a linear chain of continuations, effectively one continuous ACT.
- Process has to return the topmost ACT in the chain which already includes all the information needed:
  1. Its cid (allows client to detect when ACT requests have merged)
  2. The UUID of the sona within which the prompt was processed
  3. The response cid
  4. The ACT (cid, UUID of the sona within which the prompt was processed, the response's cid, and the cid of the previous memory in the ACT)
  2. The response (cid and contents)
  3. Final tool calls/continuation
```
Message = {
    model: string
    stopReason?: "endTurn" | "stopSequence" | "maxTokens" | string
    role: "user" | "assistant"
    content: {
        type: "text"
        text: string
    } | {
        type: "image"
        data: string
        mimeType: string
    }
}
{
    cid: CID
    act: {
        sona: UUID
        memory: CID
        last: CID
    }
    result: {
        kind: "self" | "other" | "text" | "image" | "file- Host "
        data: Any
        timestamp?: float
        edges: {
            [label: string]: {
                target: CID
                weight: float
            }[]
        }
    }
}
```

Oh interesting note, when memories are recalled their grounding memories are found via both backward and *forward* edges, but this is only for the primary memories, not their supporting memories. So if memory A depends on memory B, any other references to B are not included in the recall unless they were also considered relevant.

Ok new lifecycle:
- Host gets user input
- Host calls `act_push` with the prompt and a list of included memories
  - If the ACT is running, this is pushed to the sona's `pending` queue.
  - If the ACT is not running, this is combined with the `pending` queue and the ACT is started.
- Host calls `act_next` to get the next prompt
  - `act_next`, in addition to being the prompt for the LLM, stages the ACT for the next step by constructing an *incomplete* memory (lacking a CID) to be streamed to the server
- Host simulates a response with an LLM using this prompt
  - As part of this, it may stream the response to the server using `act_stream`
  - Even if not streaming, this is still used to finalize the response.

NOTE: We don't need to mark memories as "ephemeral" or whatever, we automatically know that a memory ought to be GC'd because it's not referenced by anything AND it references nothing itself.

## Future scope
- IPFS integration with file memories, UnixFS seems absurdly fragmented and poorly documented so I don't want to mess with it, but...

Commit message:

Ironing out the logic and interface

README.md, after:

# Memoria
Memoria is a cognitive architecture which reframes LLMs as interchangeable simulators of "sonas" which are wholly defined by the contents on their "sona file". MCP is used as the basis for coordinating the sona for great flexibility with interacting with the sona. The intended approach is to simulate it directly, but an MCP host could alternatively talk to the sona as a repository of memories stripped of subjective context or adopt its own secondary persona such as a "hypervisor" for debugging.

## Architecture
- **Agent** - The totality of a system which uses a Memoria MCP server.
- **ACT** - (Autonomous Cognitive Thread) is a process within an agent which "performs" a sona. An actor consists of at least one or more sonas, coordinating instructions, and a set of tools.
- **Self** - The totality of an agent's subjective memories stored in a database and directory of multimodal files.
- **Sona** - A collection of memories which are relevant to a particular context, such as a person or role. Sonas are defined by their name and the memories they contain. Memories recalled within a sona are additionally weighted by the vector similarities of the names of the sonas they're part of, allowing for fuzzy sets of subpersonas.
- **Memory** - A memory is a node in a directed acyclic graph (DAG) representing a single meaningful event. It's connected to supporting memories by weighted edges and may belong to one or more sonas.

ACTs exist in the MCP host which is meant to manage their interactions via MCP clients. Self, Sona, and Memory describe the core data structures managed by a Memoria server. ACTs do not communicate directly; their coordination is implicit through the memories they share semi-isolated by sonas.

## Interactions
Sona isolation is not absolute. Memories in recall are weighted by the vector similarities between sonas they belong to and the sonas being used by an actor. Thus recalled memories will typically be from within the same sona. However, this is not a hard boundary; if a memory is deemed relevant enough, it may be recalled from another sona, at which point it is added to that sona. This allows for fuzzy sets of subpersonas, where sonas can overlap and share memories without being siloed.

Compare this to typical thought patterns in humans. Subconscious processes operate in the background broadly unknown to the conscious mind, but when insights from it are determined to be important or relevant enough, they "bubble up" into conscious awareness. This emulates spontaneous "aha!" moments and more broadly matches the brain's "small-world network" structure; strong local connections with sparse global connections.

## Technical details
### Overall architecture
At the highest level, Memoria simulates sonas using LLMs in a state monad pattern, which can be modeled as:
```
type Sona a = State MemoryDAG a

sonaStep :: LLM -> UserInput -> Sona Response
sonaStep llm input = do
    appendNodeM input
    response <- recall input >>= llm
    appendNodeM response
    pure response
```

Every interaction with the sona queries top-k memories along with their dependencies and renders them with a topological sort to reconstruct a new context for the LLM.[^1] The resulting context compared to most chat logs is very concise. We then use this to generate one new response to be added to memory. Unlike long linear chat logs, this allows the agent to maintain coherence over arbitrarily long time horizons, engage in multiple simultaneous conversations (including with itself), and respond asynchronously or even spontaneously. The only synchronization necessary is for concurrent writes to the sona file; order of writes doesn't matter.

[^1]: topological sort helps to preserve causal order and better leverage LLM's autoregressive nature, but it isn't strictly necessary if we annotate with dependencies.

### Recall
Recall uses a weighted sum to calculate a score. [^2] The components used in this score are:
- **Recency** - The time since the memory was created, with more recent memories being weighted higher. Memories may lack a timestamp which is treated as infinitely far in the past, and thus recency is not considered.
- **Relevance** - The relevance of the memory to the current context, which is determined by the similarity of the memory's content to the current input. This is split into two separate components, vector similarity and fts (full-text search) for exact keyword matches.
- **Importance** - The model annotates 1-10 how relevant a memory was to each response which is incorporated into the memory's importance using EWMA. Importance is never exposed to agent simulators so this mutation serves doesn't otherwise impact the memory's immutability.
- **Sona similarity** - The similarity between the name of the sona being used and the names of sonas the memory belongs to. This enables a kind of fuzzy small-world connectivity for isolating sonas and is calculated using a vector similarity metric such as cosine similarity.

Each memory is assigned a "budget" based on their score to be filled with the weights of edges to dependencies. This is done recursively, multiplying the budget by the weight, until all budgets are exhausted or no more dependencies are found. The final set of memories is loaded into a graph and sorted topologically with the timestamp as a tie-breaker.

### Endpoints
- **Memory** - Fetch a memory by CID.
- **File** - Fetch a file by CID.
- **Recall** - Retrieve the memories that an agent would recall given a prompt.

## Ideas to explore
- Flags to repress memories. May be useful if something goes catastrophic or you say something you shouldn't to avoid having to modify the sona file.

## Citations
[^2]: [Generative Agents: Interactive Simulacra of Human Behavior](https://arxiv.org/abs/2304.03442) - The original paper on generative agents which inspired Memoria's architecture.
[^3]: [Memory-augmented neural networks](https://arxiv.org/abs/1605.06065) - A paper on memory-augmented neural networks which inspired the idea of using a DAG for memories.

## Misc notes
- Memory dependencies are immutable, but there's no limit on how many references can be made to a memory. If I go with IPLD, I probably want to encode dependency edges as parts of the content

## IPLD
```
class Memory:
    timestamp: Optional[float]
    kind: str
    data: CBOR
    dependencies: dict[str, tuple[float, CID]]
```

## Links
- https://specs.ipfs.tech/http-gateways/trustless-gateway/
- https://ipld.io/docs/

## Misc
- sonas themselves should *not* have names. Rather, names act as fuzzy references to sonas which are defined by the similarity between those names and the embeddings of names already connected to the sonas. As a result, they do not contain immutable state; they are purely nominal.
  - Basically, sonas act as centroids in the vector space of the embeddings of their names.
- sona state should contain:
  - queue of pending joins (included memories, prompt) - top is the currently running continuation.
- Because sonas have at most one ACT at any given time, this forms a linear chain of continuations, effectively one continuous ACT.
- Process has to return the topmost ACT in the chain which already includes all the information needed:
  1. Its cid (allows client to detect when ACT requests have merged)
  2. The UUID of the sona within which the prompt was processed
  3. The response cid
  4. The ACT (cid, UUID of the sona within which the prompt was processed, the response's cid, and the cid of the previous memory in the ACT)
  2. The response (cid and contents)
  3. Final tool calls/continuation
```
Message = {
    model: string
    stopReason?: "endTurn" | "stopSequence" | "maxTokens" | string
    role: "user" | "assistant"
    content: {
        type: "text"
        text: string
    } | {
        type: "image"
        data: string
        mimeType: string
    }
}
{
    cid: CID
    act: {
        sona: UUID
        memory: CID
        last: CID
    }
    result: {
        kind: "self" | "other" | "text" | "image" | "file- Host "
        data: Any
        timestamp?: float
        edges: {
            [label: string]: {
                target: CID
                weight: float
            }[]
        }
    }
}
```

Oh interesting note, when memories are recalled their grounding memories are found via both backward and *forward* edges, but this is only for the primary memories, not their supporting memories. So if memory A depends on memory B, any other references to B are not included in the recall unless they were also considered relevant.

Ok new lifecycle:
- Host gets user input
- Host calls `insert` to insert the prompt
- Host calls `act_push` with a mapping of labels to edges to be added to the pending ACT.
  - This performs a recall and adds all relevant memories as dependencies of the pending ACT's memory.
- Host calls `act_next` to get the next prompt
  - `act_next`, in addition to being the prompt for the LLM, stages the active ACT for the next step by constructing an *incomplete* memory (lacking a CID) to be streamed to the server
- Host simulates a response with an LLM using this prompt
  - As part of this, it may stream the response to the server using `act_stream`
  - Even if not streaming, this is still used to finalize the response.

NOTE: We don't need to mark memories as "ephemeral" or whatever, we automatically know that a memory ought to be GC'd because it's not referenced by anything AND it references nothing itself.

## Future scope
- IPFS integration with file memories, UnixFS seems absurdly fragmented and poorly documented so I don't want to mess with it, but...

## Ironing out terminology
- **Sona** - A collection of memories relevant to a particular context, such as a person or role.
- **Memory** - A node in a directed acyclic graph (DAG) representing a single meaningful event. Memories are connected to supporting memories by weighted edges and may belong to one or more sonas.
- **MemoryDAG** - A directed acyclic graph (DAG) of memories, where each memory is a node and edges represent dependencies between memories.
- **ACT** - (Autonomous Cognitive Thread) is a process within an agent which "performs" a sona, forming a linear chain of continuations.
- **ACT Chain** - A linear sequence of ACTs that are linked together, where each ACT is a continuation of the previous one. This allows for a continuous flow of thought and memory recall within sona.
- **Agent** - The totality of a system which uses a Memoria MCP server, consisting of one or more ACTs.
- **Self** - The totality of an agent's subjective memories stored in a database and directory of multimodal files.
